                                                                                                              Experimental Exam -- English (Official)
                                                                                                                                       Page 1 of 14




                                                                        General Instructions

                                                                                Experimental exam (20 points)



                                                                                              July 6, 2026



                                        Failure to comply with any of the following rules may result in disquali     cation. The experimental

                                        exam lasts 5 hours and is worth a total of 20 points. The beginning and end of the exam will be

                                        indicated by an announcement, as well as every hour, indicating the time elapsed. This will also be

                                        done thirty,    fteen and   ve minutes before the end of the exam.




                                        Before the Test



                                        Do not open the envelopes or boxes until instructed. The following items are provided for use at

                                        the table: (1) a pen, (2) a scienti   c calculator.




                                        During the exam



                                        • Use the supplied pen to answer the questions.



                                        • Use the A-sheets for your     nal answers. Fill in the appropriate sections with your answers and

                                        necessary observations. Draw the necessary graphs.



                                        • Blank worksheets labeled with the letter W are provided for calculations. Use designated ones.

                                        Cross o     unnecessary answers and drafts that shouldn't be graded with an X. Use only the front of

                                        each sheet and keep the margin o          the edge clean. The back side of the pages will not be scanned

                                        and their contents will not be considered



                                        • Answers should be concise and readable. Use equations, logic operators, symbols, and

                                        schematics to express your ideas clearly. Avoid using explanatory texts, as markers may not be

                                        multilingual.



                                        • Quantify uncertainty, unless otherwise noted. You must decide how many data points or series of

                                        measurements are necessary, unless otherwise speci              ed.



                                        • Do not leave your post without permission. If you need any help (going to the bathroom, getting

                                        water, etc.), lift the paddle with the "Help" sign.
                                   fi
     fi
          fi
                                        IPhO 2026                                                                               20 points | 5.0 hours
                    fi
               fi
ff
                         ff
                              fi
                                                                            Experimental Exam -- English (Official)
                                                                                                     Page 2 of 14




          At the end of the exam



          • Stop writing immediately when the end of the exam is announced.



          • Place all the sheets in the envelope provided. Arrange them face up in this order: General

          Instructions, Question Sheets (Q), Answer Sheets (A), Worksheets (W). Sort by page number.



          • The supervisors will tell you when you can leave. Don't take anything from the room with you,

          including the the calculator.




          We appreciate your collaboration.




          Speci   c instructions



          Throughout the exam, always use the values of physical constants indicated in the instructions,

          unless otherwise noted. When performing a series of measurements, explicitly indicate in the

          tables the measured values and the values represented in the graphs. Be attentive to write down

          the appropriate signi   cant digits. All graphs should clearly show the quantities involved. Always

          indicate the units of all values used.




          IPhO 2026                                                                           20 points | 5.0 hours
fi
     fi
                                                                             Experimental Exam -- English (Official)
                                                                                                      Page 3 of 14




          Ideal Gas, Vapor Pressure, and Heat Conduction

          [20 pts.]

          In this experimental exam, you will study three physical phenomena: the behavior of an ideal gas,

          the vapor pressure of water, and heat transfer by conduction. The objective of the exam is to

          analyze the relationships between pressure P, air volume V, temperature T, and time t, present

          your results in relevant graphs, and estimate associated physical constants and their associated

          uncertainties.




          Overview of the Experimental Setup



          Before beginning the experiment, read the assembly description, list of materials, general

          instructions, and procedure for each part of the test.



          The apparatus consists of two concentric cylinders made of acrylic (Fig. 1a). The inner cylinder

          (hereafter IC) can contain air and liquids, and the air inside IC is referred to as con   ned air

          (hereafter CA). The amount of liquid in the IC can be controlled by connecting the syringe to hose

          D.

          The outer cylinder (hereafter OC) can only be    lled with water and acts as a thermal jacket. Its

          water level can be adjusted using inlet and outlet hoses and valves, while its temperature is

          controlled by an electric heater. Two sensors are installed inside the IC: one for pressure and one

          for temperature. A separate temperature sensor is available in the OC.




          IPhO 2026                                                                            20 points | 5.0 hours
     fi
fi
            Experimental Exam -- English (Official)
                                     Page 4 of 14




IPhO 2026                     20 points | 5.0 hours
                                                                                Experimental Exam -- English (Official)
                                                                                                         Page 5 of 14




          Experimental Equipment



          Main Apparatus (see Fig. 2)



              1. Inner cylinder (IC): Graduated with two centimeter scales. Its     xed lids keep the contents

                   airtight.

              2. Outer cylinder (OC): Acts as a thermal jacket.

              3. Heater: Installed in the OC and powered by the electronic module.

              4. Temperature sensors: Two sensors, connected to the electronic module by black wires,

                   measure the temperature in each cylinder.

              5.   Pressure sensor hose:   Connects CA to a pressure sensor hosted in the electronic module,

                   allowing measurement of the internal pressure.

              6. OC water connections: Two hoses provide water with an inlet to and outlet from the OC.



          Valve E — IC atmospheric connection: Opens or closes the connection between the IC and the

          atmosphere.




          Electronic Module (see Fig. 3)




          The electronic module must be connected to the main power before use. The power switch, labeled

          Power, is located at the back of the module (Fig. 4).



          The digital display provides the following readings:



                   Internal pressure: Pressure inside the IC (INT. PRESSURE).

                   Atmospheric pressure: Local atmospheric pressure (ATM. PRESSURE).

                   Internal temperature: Temperature inside the IC (INT. TEMPERATURE).

                   External temperature: Temperature inside the OC (EXT. TEMPERATURE).

                   Stopwatch: Timer reading (TIMER).



          Four numbered buttons below the screen control the main module functions:



                   Button 1 — Timer: Starts or stops the stopwatch.

                   Button 2 — Reset: Clears the timer reading.

                   Button 3 — Graph display: toggles between Graph display and numerical display. This

                   function is not used in the experiments.

                   Button 4 — Heater: Turns the heater on or o    . When the heater is active, the animated

                   indicator in the lower-right corner of the screen alternates colors between red and green.



          Note: Never turn on the heater if it is not fully immersed in water. When the OC temperature

          reaches 65 °C, the heater is deactivated. It may be reactivated only after the animated indicator

          is no longer red.
     fi
          IPhO 2026                                                                               20 points | 5.0 hours
ff
                                                                                                      Experimental Exam -- English (Official)
                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 14




                                    The right side of the module (Fig. 5) contains the connections for the IC temperature sensor

                                    (Internal Temp.), the OC temperature sensor (External Temperature), the heater (Water Heater),

                                    and the hose that connects CA to the pressure sensor (Internal Pressure)




                                    Hydraulic Module (see Fig. 6)




                                    The hydraulic module contains four valves, labeled A, B, C, and D. Each valve controls a speci         c

                                     uid pathway in the apparatus:



                                          Valve A — Water inlet to OC: Controls the    ow of water into the OC through hose A (IN

                                          H2O).

                                          Valve B — Recirculator valve: Controls the   ow of water through the recirculation cycle,

                                          described in the pump operation instructions below.

                                          Valve C — Water outlet from OC: Controls the      ow of water out of the OC through hose C

                                          (OUT H2O).

                                          Valve D — Syringe connection: Controls the inlet and outlet of    uids in the IC using the

                                          syringe connected to hose D (Fig. 2). If the valve is leaky you can detach the hose from the

                                          setup and connect the syringe directly to the hose.




                                    Pump and Valve Operation




                                    The pump switch (PUMP), located on the front of the electronic module (Fig. 8), activates the pump

                                    inside the electronic module. Before turning on the pump, set the valves according to the operation

                                    you want to perform. Use the clips to secure the hoses to the edge of the containers before

                                    operating the pump.



                                          Fill the OC with water: Open valve A and close valves B and C. Place hose A in a water

                                          container. When the desired level is reached, close valve A. Make sure the water level

                                          remains at least 1 cm below the cover of the cilinder. If water does not enter OC e   ciently,

                                          immediately open and close valve B to purge the pump.

                                          Drain water from the OC: Close valve A and open valves B and C. Place hose C in a container

                                          to collect the water.

                                          Homogenize the OC temperature: Open valve B and close valves A and C. In this

                                          con   guration, water circulates through the OC in a closed loop, helping to make the

                                          temperature uniform.



                                    For the following operations, connect the syringe to hose D. The pump is not used in these cases.



                                          Add liquid to the IC: Open valves D and E, then use the syringe to introduce the liquid.

                                          Remove liquid from the IC: Open valves D and E, then use the syringe to draw out the liquid.
                               fi
fl
          fl
          fl
                               IPhO 2026                                                                                20 points | 5.0 hours
               fl
                    fl
                         ffi
     fi
                                                                  Experimental Exam -- English (Official)
                                                                                           Page 7 of 14




Additional Items: the following materials are supplied for the experiment.




      Two 100 mL syringes with a connecting hose (Fig. 7). One syringe is for water, the other for

      PG.

      Propylene glycol (PG): A container with 100 mL of PG, whose vapor pressure is negligible

      over the temperature range used in this experiment (Fig. 9). Warning: PG is miscible with

      water. It can also hydrate if open to the air. It is recommended that you keep the container

      closed while not using it.

      Cold water: A thermal container with 500 mL of cold water (Fig. 10).

      Room-temperature water: A bottle of water at room temperature (Fig. 11).

      Pouring container: A container used for pouring water (Fig. 12).

      Excess-water jug: A jug for collecting excess water (Fig. 13).

      Clips: For securing hoses and supporting components during the experiment (Fig. 14).

      Paper towels for cleanup.




IPhO 2026                                                                           20 points | 5.0 hours
                                                                                        Experimental Exam -- English (Official)
                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 14




               Important Operating Notes



               Keep the following notes in mind when setting up and operating the apparatus:



                    Valve positions: Each valve has only two positions: open (I) and closed (II)         (Fig. 15).

                    Hose connection: To remove a hose, push the hoop and pull the hose out. To insert a hose,

                    push it fully into place (Fig. 16). Note that the apparatus is fully assembled at the start of

                    the exam and the hoses normally do not need to be reconnected in the usual operation of

                    the apparatus.

                    Cylinder dimensions: Figure 17 shows the cross-sectional dimensions of the cylinders.

                    Notation: Figure 18 de   nes the notation used for the IC contents: h is the height of the

                    liquid, and H is the height of the air above the liquid.

                    Volume corrections: The internal volume of the connecting hoses is approximately

                    compensated by the volume of the temperature sensor inside the IC. Therefore, these e                ects

                    should be neglected.




               Constants and Reference Values




               The following constants and reference values are used throughout the experiment:




                    Avogadro constant: NA = 6.022 × 10
                                                         23
                                                              mol
                                                                    −1
                                                                         3
                    Speci   c heat capacity of water: c0 = 4.184 × 10        J/(kg·K)


                    Density of water:   ρ = 1000 kg/m3
                                         0


                    Molar mass of water: M 0 = 18.02 g/mol


                    Molar mass of air: M a = 28.96 g/mol


                    Molar volume of an ideal gas at normal conditions: V m = 22.4 L/mol, for T0 = 273.15 K and P0


                    = 101.3 kPa
     fi
          IPhO 2026                                                                                       20 points | 5.0 hours
          ff
fi
                                                                                               Experimental Exam -- English (Official)
                                                                                                                        Page 9 of 14




                      Part A [4.0 pt]. Isochoric (isovolumetric) process of an ideal gas


                      CA obeys the ideal gas equation of state,


                                                               PV = nRT              (1)
                      where R is the universal gas constant.




                      Procedure




                      Introduce PG into IC to h = 4.5 cm and close valves D and E. This ensures that the volume of CA is

                       xed.



                      The density of ambient air in Bucaramanga varies with local temperature and pressure. For the


                      following question, use the time-averaged value     ρ = 1.12 kg/m .  3




                        A1. [0.4 pt] Determine the mass m, number of moles n, and the total number of air molecules N

                        of the CA.




                            1. Fill OC with room temperature water   close to the top.

                            2. Turn on the heater. Don't forget to homogenize the temperature by using the pump.




                        A2. [ 1 pt] Record in a table the pressure P of the CA as a function of its temperature T.




                        A3. [0.9pt] From the data obtained in question A2, plot the behavior of pressure as a function of

                        temperature.




                      Under IPhO competitive conditions, the sensors may be intentionally decalibrated to alter the

                      expected value of R with respect to the reference value.




                        A4. [1.0pt] Use the graph from A.3 to determine the experimental value of R.




                      The thermal pressure coe     cient at constant volume is de     ned by the relationship:




                      β = P ( PT )
                        0
                               1
                               0
                                   Δ
                                   Δ
                                       ,     (2)




                      where P0 is the pressure of the system at the reference temperature T0           as indicated in the


                      reference constants and values.




                        A5. [0.7pt] Determine the value of the coe    cient   β for air.
                                                                               0
fi
                      IPhO 2026                                                                                  20 points | 5.0 hours
     ffi
                 fi
           ffi
                                                                Experimental Exam -- English (Official)
                                                                                       Page 10 of 14




Remove the PG from the IC and clean it before proceeding to the other parts. If you proceed to part

B, do not remove the hot water from OC.




IPhO 2026                                                                         20 points | 5.0 hours
                                                                         Experimental Exam -- English (Official)
                                                                                                Page 11 of 14




     Part B [8.0 pt]. Vapor Pressure


     In a closed container containing a liquid and its vapor at equilibrium, the vapor pressure depends

     on the absolute temperature T according to the Clausius–Clapeyron equation:



                     Qv
     Pv = Pv e R ( T T )              (3)
                          1       1
                 −            −
                                  0
             0



     Here, T0 is the reference temperature, taken as 0 °C. Pv0 is the vapor pressure at T0. R is the


     universal gas constant, and Qv is the molar latent heat of vaporization of water.




     Procedure
     Remember that PG and water are miscible. Use di       erent syringes for water and PG



           Fill the OC with water until the water level is close to the top.

           Fill a syringe with water, connect it to IC and open valve E, remove the syringe plunger, and

           raise the syringe until it reaches the water level at h = 5.0 cm. Close valve E and then secure

           the syringe to the jug as shown in Figure 19. This arrangement keeps the pressure inside the

           IC approximately equal to the atmospheric pressure. Make sure no air bubbles remain in the

           hose.

           Heat the water in the OC to 65 °C. Remember to use the recirculator system to homogenize

           the water temperature.

           Wait until the temperature starts to decrease to start recording H as a function of T.

           To lower the temperature further, you may replace the water in the OC with the supplied cold

           water at the appropriate time.




     IPhO 2026                                                                             20 points | 5.0 hours
ff
                                                                                    Experimental Exam -- English (Official)
                                                                                                           Page 12 of 14




                 B1. [1.0 pt] Record the height H as a function of temperature T in a table




                 B2. [1.0 pt] Use the data obtained in B1 to plot H as a function of T.




               The vapor pressure is relatively small around room temperature and the H(T) curve may be

               approximated as linear.




                 B3. [0.5 pt] Use the graph from question B2 to extrapolate and       nd the value of H0 (H at 0 °C).




                 B4. [1.0 pt] Assuming that IC contains both dry air plus water vapor, deduce an algebraic

                 expression for the vapor pressure Pv in terms of    Patm (atmospheric pressure), H 0 ,   H, T0 and T.


                 For the purposes of this problem, you can assume that the vapor pressure at 0 °C is zero.




               For the following questions, use the reference value R = 8.31 J/(mol·K).




                 B5. [4.0 pt] Using equation (3) and the expression from question B4, construct an appropriate

                 graph to determine the experimental value of Qv.




                 B6. [0.5 pt] From the value of Qv, determine L v ,(the latent heat of vaporization per unit mass)


                 indicating the formula that you used.




               Part C [8.0 pt]. Heat Conduction


               In this part of the exam, you will study the heat exchange between the water in the OC and the

               water in the IC through the wall that separates them. By analyzing the time evolution of the water

               temperature in the IC, TIC, and the water temperature in the OC, TOC, the objective of this section is


               to estimate the e   ective thermal resistance of the wall, the equilibrium temperature of the system,

               and the thermal conductivity of acrylic.



               Heat conduction through a solid wall follows the relation:



                                                   ΔQ = 1 (T − T )                 (4)
                                                   Δt   RTh OC  IC

               where   ΔQ is the heat received by the water in the IC through the wall during the time interval Δt.
               The e   ective thermal resistance   RTh depends on the material and geometry of the wall separating


               IC and OC.
          fi
               IPhO 2026                                                                               20 points | 5.0 hours
     ff
ff
                                                                             Experimental Exam -- English (Official)
                                                                                                    Page 13 of 14




     Procedure




         1. Set the water level in the OC to h = 15 cm.

         2. Heat the water in the OC to 65 °C. Use the pump to homogenize the water temperature.

         3. Set the water level in the IC to h = 10 cm and start the stopwatch.




       C1. [1.0 pt] Record the internal temperature TIC and external temperature TOC as a function of


       time t




       C2. [1.0 pt] On a single graph, plot TIC and TOC as functions of time t.




     For questions C3 and C4, ignore the heat capacity of the apparatus. Teq refers to the equilibrium


     temperature that would be reached by both IC and OC if there were no heat transfer to the

     environment.




       C3. [0.7 pt] Plot TOC - TIC as functions of both TOC and TIC on the same graph with TOC and TIC


       together on the same temperature axis and TOC - TIC on the other axis.




       C4. [1.1 pt] From the graphs constructed in C3, determine Teq . It is not necessary to calculate


       uncertainty for this question.




     If the variables are measured a     nite number of times, Equation (4) can be expressed as



                                         TIC j − TIC j
                                            ,

                                             tj − tj
                                                     ,( −1)
                                                              ∝   T̄OC − T̄IC (5)
                                                    −1


     where j represents the measurement number and            T   are the average temperatures at each cylinder

     during the interval   tj
                            −1 to   tj
       C5. [1.0 pt] Graph the expression on the left hand side of Equation 5 as a function of the

       expression on the right hand side




       C6. [1.6 pt] Determine the value of RTh from the graph constructed in C5.




      Fourier ’s law for radial heat conduction through a slim cylindrical wall can be written as:



                                                dQ = −λA dT            (6)
                                                dt       dr



     IPhO 2026                                                                                 20 points | 5.0 hours
fi
                                                                         Experimental Exam -- English (Official)
                                                                                                Page 14 of 14




     where A is the area of the wall,   λ is the thermal conductivity of the wall material, and r denotes the
     distance from the axis of the cylinder.




       C7. [1.6 pt] Using equations (4) and (6), determine the value   λ of the thermal conductivity of
       acrylic (the material separating IC and OC), indicating the formula that you used.
​​
     IPhO 2026                                                                             20 points | 5.0 hours
